Once around, the pistol
star. Very famous star indeed, perhaps
because it was believed to be one of the
most massive and most luminous stars in
the
universe. It was discovered by the
Hubble Space Telescope back in 1990 when
it was examining material in and around
the center of the galaxy. And what was
discovered was that despite the fact
that this is quite hard to observe as we
shall see there was a very powerful star
there. Now it's also given the
designation V for variable
4647 and Sagittari because it's in the
constellation of Sagittarius. That's
where we see the center of the galaxy.
So, here's a star map of Sagittarius,
which unfortunately always looks like a
teapot to me rather than an archer
riding a horse. But, uh, marked with the
red circle, that is where we find the
pistol star. Just below the region
labeled M8 and M20, those are the Lagoon
and Triffid Nebula um, in the uh,
constellation of Sagittarius there. And
if we zoom in a little bit closer, we
have the teapot again. And then you can
see where the pistol star is deep in the
star and dust clouds of Sagittarius in
that central region of the galaxy. Very,
very hard to see
indeed. With visible light, if they
wasn't for all of the dirt and dust
that's obscuring it, we would see it
perhaps as a magnitude 4 star. So, a
moderately faint one, but nevertheless
visible. But with all of that
intervening dust and gas, you can't see
it at all unless you have an infrared
telescope. So, that central region of
the galaxy is an amazingly active zone.
There's a lot going on. There's
obviously Sagittarius a star, the
central black hole of the Milky Way, 4
million times the solar mass in there
and about 25,000 light years from us.
Now, just to the left of the center
there is a very bright region that you
can see in the image. That's the
quintuplet cluster. Um, and it's buried
in all of that gas and dust. But if we
use an infrared telescope, we've got the
ability to cut through that infrared is
not stopped by dust. The wavelength of
the light is long enough that it's not
scattered by the dust
particles. And we can see the brightest
star just below right of center. There
is the pistol star in this lovely star
cluster. uh almost looks like a visible
light image, but this is an infrared
image taken cutting through all of that
dust. And this cluster discovered back
in 83 is only about 100 light years from
Sagittarius A star, the center of the
Milky Way galaxy. And it contains a lot
of super bright stars. There are a
couple of other LBVs, luminous bright
variables, which the pistol star is one
of, several red super giants, and
numerous Wolf Ray stars. Wolf Ray stars
are the most powerful of all, absolutely
immense mass, and produce enormous
amounts of energy. And by studying these
giant stars, we can estimate the age of
this cluster, the quintuplet cluster to
be around 4 million years based on the
evolutionary state of the stars uh of
those masses. They will have evolved and
some of them will have already become
into the giant phase where they have
exhausted the hydrogen in their cores in
just that short 4 million years. Here's
another picture again of the same region
just picking out the stars and uh in
different wavebands there but uh
essentially showing the same thing. Now
if we have a look at the pistol star
itself, it is difficult because of all
that gas and dust. The image on the left
there is an
estimated impression of what it might
look like were we able to see it up
close and unobscured. Um, and the image
on the right is the true picture with
all of the intervening material blocking
our line of
sight, but it does make it hard to
estimate the true mass of this object.
And the most widely accepted mass is 125
times the mass of the sun. But it what
ranges from 27.5 to
250. 250 was the early estimates just
based on the
brightness. But more recent attempts to
model the evolutionary stages of the
stars in this cluster have got down to
this much lower figure of 27.5. Although
the consensus seems to be round about
that 100 125 mark for the mass and again
that affects the estimate
of how big it is. We think 420 times the
radius of the sun. So an absolute
monster but estimates do range to uh
lower figures than that as well.
What we can do more easily is measure
the surface temperature and that's
12,000 Kelvin. So it's hot and would be
glowing blue and classed as a luminous
blue variable. Um the true power output
a little bit more difficult to estimate.
This time there's only a factor of two
in it between 1.6 and 3.3 million times
as bright as the sun. And actually one
of the ways you can check of the
consistency of these measurements and
estimates is using the Stefan Boltzman
law which relates temperature raised to
the power 4 to the uh actual power
output. And so what we can do here is
plug in the numbers. We take the
temperature of the sun as 5772 as our
baseline and divide it by 12,000 for the
surface temperature of the pistol star.
Raise that to the power four multiply it
by the ratio of the power output 3,00
sorry
3,300,000 times as bright and then you
take the square root of that. then that
gives you an estimate of the radius
um in terms of comparison to the radius
of the sun which is 420 which is where
all those numbers kind of fit together.
So if you change one you really have to
change all the other estimates as
well. Now one of the features of these
very massive powerful stars is that they
produce a very intense solar wind. It's
actually 10 billion times more powerful
than that of our sun. And that enormous
outflow of material and radiation and
energy has a massive effect on the
surrounding nebula material in and
around the uh quintupet
cluster. A few thousand years ago,
probably something between four and
6,000 years ago, the pistol star
underwent an enormous outburst and it
threw out about 10 times the mass of the
sun in a huge ejection uh which has
created in this black and white image.
The pistol star is the thing buried in
the center of this outflow roughly
spherical around the star there that you
can see of material that was being
hurled away from the central star. And
so for this reason actually the pistol
star probably started its life as a much
more massive object and is gradually
throwing off these huge ejections of
material.
We think it's about 4 million years old
based on the estimates and likely to
last something between 1 million and 3
million years more. So it's not going to
come to the end of its life tomorrow
probably. And when it does so that will
cause an absolutely enormous explosion,
what we would call a hypernova in the
modern uh way of talking about these
things. A hypernova being a supernova
but a hund times more
powerful. And the way that this would
work is that the star would implode on
itself directly to form a black hole.
Once its core dies and is not able to
release any more nuclear energy, the
force of gravity will just crush the
core
down way past any attempt for uh the
formation of the other stages of white
dwarfs or neutron stars or even the
quark star straight the way down to a
black hole. And uh this would be a very
violent event indeed and it would create
a gamma ray burst uh jets of gamma rays
emerging along the polar axis in a long
duration gammaray burst. Um so it' be
very very spectacular but 25,000 light
years away I don't think it will do the
earth any harm at all and I don't think
the gammaray jets are likely to be
pointing in our direction anyway. So,
uh, I hope you've enjoyed that little
tour of the pistol star, one of the
brightest and most powerful stars in the
Milky Way galaxy, if not in the rest of
the universe. So, thanks very much for
listening, and I'll be back with more
tales of stars and astronomical objects
as we go along.